
https://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/ChangingEncodings
Changing encodings:

When Emacs reads a file, it determines the encoding, reads the file, decodes
it into an internal representation, and stores the coding-system used in a
variable to be used when saving the file. When saving, the buffer is encoded
using the stored coding-system and written to the file again.

You can change the encoding to use for the file when saving using "C-x C-m f".
You can also force this immediately by using
"C-x C-m c <encoding> RET C-x C-w RET". You can list all available encodings
with "M-x list-coding-systems".

You can force Emacs to read a file in a specific encoding with
"C-x RET c C-x C-f". If you opened a file and EMACS determined the encoding
incorrectly, you can use "M-x revert-buffer-with-coding-system", to reload
the file with a named encoding.

For characters covered by ISO 8859, you can interconvert most encodings in
Emacs 21.3, courtesy of the code in ucs-tables.el. – fx

Maybe some more explanation is needed, here. In an Emacs running in a Latin-1
locale, create a buffer containing the letter "ö". Save. The modeline indicates
Latin-1 via the "1". Now save using "C-x C-m c latin-2 RET C-x C-w RET". The
modeline indicates Latin-2 via the "2". Kill the buffer, reopen it. It displays
correctly, but the modeline indicates Latin-1 again. When and why did Emacs do
the change from Latin-2 back to Latin-1? Does Locale take precedence over
"C-x C-m c"?

If, in a Latin-1 environment, you visit a non-ASCII file that doesn't contain
bytes in the range #x80 to #x9f, it is decoded as Latin-1 unless its encoding
is specified explicitly somehow. The character `ö" has the same code point in
Latin-1 and Latin-2, which is why it "displays correctly".
See M-x list-charset-chars and C-u C-x =.

https://superuser.com/questions/549497/how-to-switch-back-text-encoding-to-utf-8-with-emacs


If you haven't changed the file, you can try
M-x revert-buffer-with-coding-system
One of latin-1 or utf-8 should work, depending on the file.

You can also mark the entire file with C-x h and then try
M-x recode-region
It will ask you for Text was really in and But was interpreted as. For the
first file in your question, it looks like it should be latin-1 and utf-8,
and for the second example it should probably be the other way around,
utf-8 and latin-1.

After you got it right, you can choose which coding system to save the
file with using
M-x set-buffer-file-coding-system
(or C-x C-m f for short).

Set coding system to use while saving the file:
C-x RET f, utf-8
M-x set-buffer-file-coding-system
C-x RET r, utf-8
M-x revert-buffer-with-coding-system

Open file with MS-DOS encoding:
C-x RET c, cp866, C-x C-f, dos.txt
Save file in utf-8 encoding:
C-x RET f, utf-8, C-x C-s
C-x RET f, utf-8-unix, C-x C-s

